LUX ÆTERNA: SINGULARITY AND THE SEA OF LIGHT

Today, we’re going to be exploring an extension of my Theory of Everything in the context of the nature of the universe, time, creation, and destruction. One of the things that has always bothered me about the prevailing notion of cosmogeny (re: the big bang theory, and no, not the show, which also bothers me) is the idea that something can be created from nothing. The universe that we live in, complex as it may be, doesn’t appear to be self-contradictory (I tend to see paradoxes as simply indicators that we’re not looking at things from the right angle yet,) so it always rubbed me the wrong way that we look at existence as something that spontaneously arises and inevitably permanently ceases to exist at some far arbitrary point in the future.

My central theory is going to be required reading for this article, but I’ll attempt to summarize it briefly here for the sake of argument.

At its core, my Theory of Everything is based around the largest possible picture of reality that we can conceive of: the span of time from the beginning of the universe to the end. There are many laws of physics that concern the various things that go on around us, but my primary point of concern is the laws of thermodynamics.

The first law of thermodynamics states that in a closed system, the total energy of remains constant. Energy (and thus matter) can be neither created nor destroyed, it can only change forms. If you light a match, the match becomes heat, light, smoke, and while the match as we know it conceptually is destroyed, it simply changes forms into its constituent parts- the chemical energy is released as bonds break down and radiate out the light and heat, and particles shoot off, creating the smoke.

The second law of thermodynamics states that heat always moves from hotter to colder objects unless energy is applied to do otherwise. The heat from the match we just lit moves from the flame to the colder air around it, and not backwards. This notion is called entropy, and I consider entropy to be the most important concept to understand in all of physics. Entropy is why things fall apart, why rocks erode, why fires go out, why ice melts and why hot rooms get cold over time. It’s one-directional, and the direction it goes in is the direction everything goes in- forward in time, toward the inevitable heat-death of the universe, or so they say.

That’s the third law- a system's entropy approaches a constant value as its temperature approaches absolute zero.

Now, I’m not debating the validity of the laws of thermodynamics, they’re testable and track. However, it’s at the edges that we start to see issues. Clearly, the universe came into existence (unless you want to debate the notion that existence exists, in which case do so elsewhere,) but that fact seems to be nonsensical in the context of thermodynamics. If matter and energy can neither be created nor destroyed, if it takes more energy to put things together than it does for them to fall apart, then how do we find everything in the universe condensed into a single point in the first place?

Causality is a bitch. There has to be a first cause- existence cannot spring into existence without first existing- it would violate thermodynamics. And that first cause has to have a cause before it- for every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction. What is required is a causeless cause, which is a paradox and thus unlikely to be the case.

Which is more likely- a causeless cause that violates thermodynamics or existence simply existing, always and forever? If it just is, it doesn’t need to be justified. If it ever wasn’t and then suddenly was, it does.

If existence exists, has always existed, and always will, things get a bit more interesting. Enter my theory of everything. Unlike many modern academics, I don’t think consciousness is an illusion. Quite the opposite, I think consciousness is real, necessary, and a fundamental property of being. The universe is equal parts subjective and objective, observer and observed.

Imagine a universe with no observer. If a tree falls in a forest and no one is around to hear it, what is a tree? We think of the particles that make up a tree relative to our own perception of it. Color is something we see, texture is something we feel, the scent of the pine (you know what I mean) and even the name pine are all things relative to our perception of waves appearing as particles that happen to be in the form of what we call a tree.

A universe with no observer would be an infinite sea of particles- energy, light, whatever you think that is, your conception of it is still relative to you, the observer, thinking about it. It would be beyond perception, beyond imagination, beyond existence as we experience it.

Similarly, you can perhaps more easily imagine an observer with no universe. Pure consciousness with nothing to observe, no thoughts because you have no sensory perception, no words because you have no mouth and nothing to talk about anyway, no vision because you have no eyes and nothing to look at. Pure is-ness, that which has the quality of being without anything to do.

The subjective state of being and the objective state of existent things are distinct, but inseparable except in thought experiments like this. Consciousness is a fundamental property of reality, the end. You cannot separate the two without contradictions and paradox. How would you prove something exists without you being there, how would you prove you exist with no one to prove yourself to?

If consciousness exists, then what does that mean for thermodynamics. My theory says that there is an equal and opposite counter-entropic force called syntropy, and that as the matches of the world’s energy burn out, we gain subjective information as a consequence. Life is a counter-entropic force that becomes more complex and can deal with more complex information as it develops, and that leads us towards a place of infinite information at the end of time, an infinitely complex consciousness (or something even beyond our conception of consciousness- imagine the difference between ours and an ant’s consciousness and multiply it exponentially.)

I have to imagine that as a consequence of this there is some sort of baseline micro-consciousness in all parts of the universe. At the very least, I think DNA and other organic molecules have to have something like consciousness in them, because consciousness, like matter and energy (which it is a part of, ) can neither be created nor destroyed without causing some interesting problems.

Immediately, however, you’d probably push back at the notion that consciousness can’t be destroyed- people die all the time! This is true. However, when I say consciousness I don’t mean the self-aware state of your current mode of existence. Your particular consciousness came into existence whenever you gradually developed self-awareness as a child, although you can’t put a finger on when specifically that was. We make the mistake of assuming that only our consciousness is consciousness and that every other form is somehow less-than, although by that logic someone like Goethe or DaVinci could say the same about us.

We’re solipsistic in that sense- we act like only our own form of consciousness is valid because we have a very hard time imagining something other than ourselves. As I said many years ago, we can only understand others in the manner and to the extent that we understand ourselves, and this holds true here. However, whether or not science has caught up to these notions, people have considered the notion that all matter has some degree of consciousness in it for thousands of years with animism. Science likes to characterize religion in the most immature, moronic sense, but you can look at something like Vedic philosophy and see many concepts that mirror quantum physics-so who’s immature here?

I should say that I personally do not believe that the only acceptable form of truth is empirical, rational truth (the Roman veritas, as in verifiable.) You cannot prove that consciousness exists because it’s subjective, but that hasn’t stopped many ostensibly smarter and certainly better-paid scientists and intellectuals than myself from trying incredibly hard to do so. When they fail to do so, they like to try and prove that it doesn’t exist, which is similarly impossible, because it’s subjective.‍

I understand why people do this, but it’s moronic and should be laughed at in the way that we laugh at flat-earthers. You’re welcome to tell me that you yourself are lacking consciousness, but please don’t use your sad mode of being and opinions about it to tell me about my consciousness. Thanks!

Subjective truths (the Greek gnosis, as in diagnosis) exist, too. Your consciousness is one of them, the experience of color, love, pain, fear, taste, anger, and thought are more. They’re real, just not empirically real- but despite what the prevailing midwittery suggests, that does not make them unreal. Much like subjectivity and objectivity being distinct yet inseparable, gnosis and veritas are distinct yet inseparable. I use the word aletheia (unconcealedness, similar to the Sanskrit word Sat, which means both real and true) to mean the sort of truth that encompasses both the subjective and objective.

Notice that when you acknowledge both of these seemingly contradictory things, everything starts making a whole lot more sense. When we think only one exists, you get the split between idealism and materialism (Plato and Aristotle,) the mind-body dichotomy, the split between religion and science, the rift between theory and practice, the tension between feminine and masculine, and ultimately a universe that could somehow spring into existence without cause.

Paradoxes, all the way down!

Yes, everything makes much more sense when you stop trying to separate these two basic facts of existence. There is an observer and that which is observed, and you can’t have one without the other, although they are distinct. They’re also the same, but that’s more heady than I’m going to get in this article, as we’re already far too heady as-is.

Let’s get to the matter at hand and talk about what this theory means for time and space.

My theory here is that the universe as we know it is the span of space-time that comes out from a white hole and goes into a black hole. The universe has pairs of singularities (black and white holes) that act as sort of a matter recycling machine, and time as we know it, which is relative, is the span from the exit of the white hole to the entrance of a black hole.


Immediately, we see that on a purely intuitive level, this resolves the problem of the big bang and something-from-nothing-ness that we identified before. Entropy within the universe (meaning the span of space-time between white hole expansion and black hole contraction) is not violated, but beyond the singularity of the big black hole at the end of time, a new universe is created and the cycle begins again.


Here’s some baseless speculation:

Scientists theorize that there is a supermassive black hole at the center of the galaxy, and that makes sense. My thought is that because life and consciousness are fundamentally part of the equation, there must be some correlation between the development of a black hole and the formation of a galaxy around it which will inevitably contain planets that will inevitably contain life, and that life will inevitably collapse into the singularity at the center, which creates another universe where it happens again and again, ad infinitum. Many are the beads in Indra’s net.

In an intuitive sense, the process mirrors biology: conception is a singularity of consciousness, you grow in a womb and are expelled from it, you go out and learn about the world, fall in love, and your DNA enters another womb where a new consciousness forms and is similarly expelled, ad infinitum. The universe is a womb of a higher order.

Perhaps death itself is a singularity. Your consciousness is scattered by your death and the fragments of it return to the universe, where they are inevitably gathered into a black hole and spit out of a white hole into a new universe where they form together again. I tend to think that all consciousness is the same substance, just plugged into different vehicles. The electricity in your blender and toaster is the same sort of energy, but the output is quite different. Consciousness, the substance, is the same for everyone, but consciousness, the experience, is the base substance combined with the physiological wiring and circuitry of your body. Ram Dass once said “everyone you meet is God in drag,” and that tracks here.

In this sense, ego is the identification with your instance of consciousness rather than with the substance of consciousness. I, Garrett the person, versus, I, consciousness which at this moment happens to take the form of Garrett the person. If everyone understood this and could orient accordingly, would the world be a better place?

Imagine if we looked at the world this way. Life, the concept, as an eternal and sacred thing. The nature of consciousness and being united, the physical and spiritual as inseparable, the nature of birth and death a reflection of the creation and destruction that the universe is undergoing as well, and that even above this instance of the universe, there is an infinite chain of universes that exist and will be destroyed, that have existed and will exist again. An infinite sea of light and energy taking and losing form, a limitless ocean of possibilities that carry on without end, a boundless chain of birth, life, death, and new birth.

It makes being sacred, something you cannot find in the scientific worldview of spontaneous appearance and inevitable heat-death. That worldview is nihilistic and has no place for the beautiful, the good, and the timeless experience of the profound nature of what it is to be.

It makes all of life a tremendous miracle, it makes your very being holy, and it lights a path to a better world where we can rectify the numerous paradoxes that we face in seeing things the way we currently do in the modern world. Imagine living in harmony with this universe, seeing the divine in our very genes and even in the particles that make up those genes. Imagine a world where we saw every moment as sacred and divine, purposeful and drenched in a deep, abiding meaning.

It’s easy if you try.


SPIRAL OUT: MODERNITY AND THE END OF HISTORY

Ours is a unique place in history. Technology and industrialization have driven major social changes and the average person in the developed world has access to resources, information, and luxuries that would make the greatest king a century ago look like little more than an ignorant pauper.

Are we better for it?

Perhaps we’ve just exchanged one set of problems for another. We traded the difficulties of dealing with physical reality for those of the social and psychological worlds. It’s true, the average person is no longer starving because of a failed harvest or because he’s a bad hunter, but we’re left with more complicated problems to solve that are well outside of the grasp of individuals to reasonably cope with. The poorest in our society are overweight and prone to illnesses like diabetes which effectively did not exist before the discovery of sugarcane, for example.

Here’s a thought-provoking line of inquiry- can you reasonably say that the world we live in is one that the average person wants to live in? We like to imagine we’re a democratic society (or at least that we’re aspiring to become more democratic,) but as far as the structure of society is concerned, I personally don’t remember being asked.

Who decided that cities should be designed around cars? In the past, it was considered to be the fault of drivers for striking pedestrians and that the pedestrians had right-of-way because cities were walkable first. Before it was called jaywalkers, we had jay-drivers (jay meaning a “rube” or “simpleton”) in 1905 and we still thought of cities as a thing designed for people, not machines. Of course, that changed when the automobile industry started to shift the blame onto pedestrians for their demise at the hands of machines, and we instead worry about jaywalkers today.

Who decided what should be taught in schools? It’s certainly not something the average person has any meaningful input in. In America between 1852-1918, the states enacted compulsory education laws giving the government the power to fine parents who did not send their children and even kidnap those children from their parents if they were deemed unfit. Today, you can petition the school board to make a change if you feel so inclined, but you’re not asked to vote on the curriculum or consulted in a meaningful way.

We like to think that we’re more free than we were in the past, but we’ve simply changed our definitions of what freedom means. In some ways, we’re extremely free- you’re free to buy whatever car you’d like that’s available on the market (unless you live in California, of course.) In others, you’re not as free- in most places, you’re not free to live in walkable cities designed around people rather than cars, since the automotive industry has more of a voice than you. You’re free to homeschool with varying degrees of difficulty, but you’re generally not free from state-mandated standards of education.

Whether it was an intentional decision made by some powerful group or simply the direction that modernization has pushed us in, the modern world we find ourselves in is not really one that is open for debate. It’s very difficult to imagine a person deciding they no longer want to participate in the modern world and leaving it to engage in subsistence hunting or farming in traditional ways. The world we live in is largely not welcoming to those who disagree with it. Eddie Vedder’s song Society from the Into the Wild soundtrack comes to mind:

“Society, have mercy on me, I hope you're not angry if I disagree.”
Modernity is a fickle thing. We like to think we’re free, and that’s largely true within the scope of modernity. However, it’s nearly impossible to be free of modernity itself.

Francis Fukuyama called this concept “The End of History,” in his 1989 article “The End of History?” and later in his book, “The End of History and the Last Man.”  His theory was that liberal democracy had been so thoroughly accepted no great changes in governance would ever occur again. The end of history here is not a claim that nothing would ever happen again, but that the core structure of society would never deviate from liberal democracy. He argues that liberal democracy is the supreme ideal of human life and is thus the correct political system, and as such, no further development is necessary.

This idea has roots further back than Fukuyama, going back through Marx to Hegel, who is responsible for our modern concept of history as a linear, progressive process of increasing human freedom and liberty over time. He’s the father of what we now call the Hegelian dialectic: the notion that history is a process by which we move from the thesis of one age (the central concept of a culture or system) to its antithesis (due to internal contradictions.) This creates a conflict in which both are resolved in a non-paradoxical synthesis of the two. The process inevitably repeats itself, moving towards progress.

Before modernity and the Enlightenment, history was looked at in a more cyclical fashion as opposed to our linear, progressive perspective. This is echoed in sentiments like those in Ecclesiastes, 

‍

“What has been will be again, what has been done will be done again;
There is nothing new under the sun.

Is there anything of which one can say, "Look! This is something new"?
It was here already, long ago; it was here before our time.”
‍

or

‍

“There is a time for everything,
and a season for every activity under heaven:
a time to be born and a time to die.”
‍

We have the Greek Kyklos, meaning “circle” or “cycle,” which is the progression from one form of government to another in a degradatory or contra-progressive succession. Polybius’ concept of Anakyklosis as the move from monarchy through aristocracy to democracy, chaos, and eventually the restarting of the cycle. It begins with a wise leader establishing society with a simple monarchy, then the transition to his children ruling in kingship, which begets tyranny. Next, the powerful in the tyrant society depose the despot and establish aristocracy, their children become corrupt and instantiate an oligarchy. Finally, the people take power back with democracy, and the democracy devolves into mob rule (ochlocracy or demagarchy) until a demagogue or wise leader emerges to consolidate power and return the system to either tyranny or a just monarchy. 

anacyclosis-1700 | Thoughtscapes – Reimagining
This image uses some slightly different terms but the gist is the same.
In the east, we have the Hindu concept of the Yugas, or ages. The word Yuga is similar to the Greek Aion (where we get aeon and eon from) in that it denotes a bounded age or era. In Hinduism, the world is represented by the Bull of Dharma (a symbol for morality and right-conduct.) In the first Yuga, the Satya Yuga (or Age of Truth,) the Bull of Dharma has four legs and is stable- a golden age of prosperity and morality. Time takes us through the Treta Yuga (Age of Three [legs]) and Dvapara Yuga (Age of Two [legs]) and society degrades into lower states of morality and understanding. Finally, we reach chaos in the Kali Yuga (the Age of Strife) and the world is ruled by the demon Kali, until he is slain by Kalki, an avatar of Vishnu. Then, a new Satya Yuga begins, and the cycle is restarted.

‍

Kala: Time – Heart Of Hinduism
‍

The pre-Enlightenment world had a deep understanding of the cyclical nature of time. They believed that every stage of the society contained within itself the seeds of its own end, and as such each action begets a reaction, much like Hegel’s dialectic. However, unlike in Hegel’s model, they believed the world was constantly falling apart, dying only to be reborn in the strife brought with the end of a cycle.

One of the basic facts of our existence is that time moves in a single direction. Because of the laws of thermodynamics, if you light a match, you can’t use the energy of it burning to put the match back together. It was once a match, it is briefly a light, it will thus and always be ashes. Time moves ever onwards in a march towards death and darkness.

However, the Greeks had three concepts of time that I’ve written about here several times. Linear time is Chronos, the right time to act or the divine moment is Kairos, and the cyclical, mythic, sacred time is Aion. Chronos is the path of an arrow from archer’s bow to target, Kairos is the perfect moment to strike your target, and Aion is the eternal dance of hunter and prey that recurs, over and over, again and again.

The Greek Kyklos and the Hindu Yugas are describing the interaction between a conceptual Aion (the cycle of government and society that recurs) and the tangible arc of Chronos (a particular kingdom that falls to aristocracy which falls to democracy and then to ruin.) Chronos intersects with Aion in Kairos- the linear time we inhabit touches the sacred and cyclical time in certain significant moments that are heavy with the weight of historical importance.

In modernity, however, we have no room for Aion, no place for cycles, and thus no connection to the sacred or meaningful. Aion is fundamentally where timeless experiences of religious or spiritual significance occur. It’s our connection to values and meaning that transcend the individual nature of consciousness, and it’s no surprise that our modern world feels very meaningless as a result of our disconnect from Aion. We live in Cronos and are moving towards a sort of endless Kairos, an eternal present free from the cyclical changes of Aion.

We are trying to escape time.

To take a page from Hegel, let’s imagine that the ancient cyclical model of time and the modern linear conception are actually part of the same thing. If the cyclical model is our thesis, and the linear model is our antithesis, what does a synthesis look like?

‍

“History Doesn’t Repeat Itself, but It Often Rhymes” – Mark Twain
‍

The Spiral Theory of History

I want to propose the spiral theory of history.


‍

Let’s imagine a two dimensional model of history as a line. It starts at point A and ends at point B, and time moves in the direction from A to B. Pretty straightforward. The difference between the modern and ancient conceptions of time are that in modern time, A and B are far away from each other, and in ancient time, A and B are the same point and the line moves in a circle.

‍


‍

We know that time is one-directional, so we can’t imagine it as a pure cycle. However, if we imagine the cycle occurring in two dimensions, and the line occurring in a third, we realize that both models can coexist as the spiral of history.


We move forward through Chronos, and we orbit through or around the cycles of Aion at the same time. Time, like DNA, spirals in a helix, and we progress forward even as we decay. We can move in two directions at the same time, which is why in our modern world we can feel like things are getting better and worse at the same time- because they are.


‍

Technology seems to be bound innately to Chronos. We can create, innovate, and build new things, but they don’t seem to touch Aion other than consequentially. An iPhone itself isn’t meaningful, but being able to FaceTime your relatives who live far away is technology that enables you to connect with meaning that was already there (or perhaps meaning you were unable to access before.) Technology itself does not create meaning, but what we do with it can be meaningful- we connect to Aion as individuals and as groups, not as consumers.

The three kinds of time also correspond to the three Values I’ve been developing in my writing: Love, Will, and Truth. Kairos is Love: it’s eternally present and in the moment. It’s subjective, personal, and experiential. Chronos is Will, it’s decisive, action and consequence, and it’s progressive or degradatory. Aion is Truth: it’s timeless, it encompasses the finite human life and the infinity of time, it’s meaning at the intersection of the present and the timeless.

Because we live in Chronos in the modern world, we live in a world driven by the hypermasculine forces of the Will. We’re worried about factual matters, rationality, science, money, data, technology, and other Chronos-bound concepts. We’re always running out of time, and we never get more of it, so everything is tinged with a desperation and competitiveness that you don’t see in the moment of Kairos or in the timelessness of Aion. When you’re present in Kairos, you’re not concerned with tomorrow, it’s pure being, and in Aion, you’re touching the eternal, so you realize that life goes on beyond the individual. Our modern world has little place for these sorts of experiences and the values that go along with them.

However, if the Spiral Theory of History is true, then inevitably the End of History that we’re allegedly living in will come to an end, too. Rather than seeing the system we’re living in as the ideal, we can look at it as yet another phase. This too, shall pass.

Frankly, the notion that our modern world is some pinnacle of virtue strikes me as absolute hubris spoken by those who have no connection to the lives of the average person in our society. The vision they espouse looks like meaningless corporate work, endless consumerism, and the death of everything that mattered to humanity before the advent of industrialization and technology. If that’s supposed to be the ideal system, then I don’t want to live in an ideal at all.

Humanity has lost all connection to eternity. The world imagined by the End of History is an eternal present where nothing changes except the next new product marketed to you as a surrogate for genuine meaning.

History, however, tells us a different story. There are few constants across time except the human striving towards immortality, to live and exist in a way that frees us from the shackles of time and the slow march towards death. We build monuments to our excellence, like Ozymandias, and just as Ozymandias himself, those too crumble to dust in time. We cannot escape time, because the very nature of our existence is bound to it. One can no better imagine life without time than a mind without a body- what would you think about with no senses?

For better or worse, time is a fact, and history is real. It does not matter how perfect a single person, system, or mode of governance may have been in the grand scheme of things, because with each successive generation, all things must be learned anew. Even Marcus Aurelius, great emperor that he was, was father to Commodus, who was a wretched tyrant. The system itself cannot correct for good or bad rulers, or even for an educated or ignorant populace. All the technology in the world will fail before a generation that does not care to learn how to use it correctly.

Where does this leave us?

If the Kyklos is true, we can expect that our current era, which is something between corrupt oligarchy and the mob rule of democracy, will begin to push for a demagogue. The desire is clearly there, and I can tell you which political party you’re a part of by who you fear the demagogue may be. We’ll likely descend into conflict, perhaps at a global scale (because modernity and the liberal democracy that comes with it are a global phenomenon,) and we either move towards a tyrant or a wise ruler, depending on how the cards fall.

We can talk about ideal systems all we want, but those who fail to learn from history are doomed to see it rhyme in their time. 


THE FOURGAMES DECK: CREATING A HANDY ORACLE CARD GAME

It’s taken very nearly two years, but I’ve gotten the final invoice from our manufacturer at last, and the FourGames Deck is complete. What is the FourGames Deck, you might be asking? FourGame Dynamics, or FourGames for short, is a set of mental models created by Jamie Combs, founder of Natural Balance Foods. Jamie tasked me with creating a standard 52 card deck using FourGames that works both as a normal set of playing cards as well as an oracle deck, which is a general name for decks like Tarot or Lenormand that have symbolic meanings for the cards. Today, I’m going to give you a walkthrough of the last two years of this project from ideation, design, prototyping, and manufacturing.

Let’s get it.

We’ll start with a basic introduction to what FourGames is- it’s the four areas of life that every person deals with, all the time:

‍


‍
Short Game is: Mind, Body, and Emotions
Mid Game is: Environment, Gadgets, and Systems
Long Game is: Roles, Goals, and Narratives
Deep Game is: Mystery, Metaphor, and Meaning

Everyone has a relationship with their inner world, their outer world, the world of story, and the world of intangibles. However, we often confuse the four and talk about one when we mean the other. FourGames is just a handy way to simplify how we understand the complex world we live in to help us deal with complicated and nuanced topics a bit more easily.

My initial idea was to make a deck similar to a 72-card Tarot deck, one of the oldest kinds of oracle decks and the origin of our normal modern 52-card decks, replacing the four suits of Cups, Pentacles, Swords, and Wands with the Short, Mid, Long, and Deep Games respectively.

In Tarot, the suits represent the following:

Cups - Water - Hearts - Emotions and love

Pentacles - Earth - Diamonds - Possessions and the physical world

Swords - Air - Spades - Reason and Mind

Wands - Fire - Clubs - Creativity and Will

They map very neatly onto the FourGames- in fact, it was almost too convenient to be believed. A few years ago, the first project I did for Jamie was creating four mandalas for the FourGames, and the symbols I designed then fit perfectly into the four suit symbols for the deck:



However, I’m more of a designer than an illustrator, and Tarot decks are 72 fully-illustrated cards, so that wasn’t possible. Instead, the challenge was to figure out how to make an oracle deck out of a normal set of 52 cards instead of 72 illustrated Tarot cards.

Once I understood that the Four Games were the four suits, we had a place to start, so the task was to figure out how we could use the 13 cards in each suit to tell a story. I split the 13 cards into the 10 numbered cards (also called Pip cards) from Ace to 10, and the three court cards (also called face cards,) the Jack, Queen, and King.

I scoured as many philosophical and mystical systems as I could get my hands on, and inevitably settled on Joseph Campbell’s Monomyth (the Hero’s Journey,) Carol Pearson’s 12 Archetypes, and Kabbalah’s 10-part Sefirot as our building blocks. I wanted to find a way to incorporate Spiral Dynamics, but I wasn’t able to make it fit in neatly.

First, from the Hero’s Journey, I looked at the many different versions. Campbell’s has 17 stages, and there are a few others that are either 8 or 12 steps. I combined the Hero’s Journey with the 10 Sefirot, and that gave us our Ace-10 cards (the corresponding Sefirot is in parentheses):

A: The Essence (Wisdom)
2: The Impulse (Understanding)

3: The Challenge (Knowledge)
4: The Virtue (Kindness)

5: The Dark Night (Judgment)
6: The Dawn (Beauty)

7: The Burden (Victory)
8: The Gift (Glory)

9: The Unification (Foundation)
10: The Completion (Kingship)

This built the structure of each Game’s Journey, the story of the progression from the raw form of the Game’s Essence to the fulfillment of the Game with the Completion. Each card is paired with the immediate next card to show progression. For example, the Dark Night is followed immediately by the Dawn- this builds in a way of communicating that every bad thing that happens to you in life can actually lead you to something better, which helps to frame our lives in a more constructive way.

Next, I had to figure out how to structure the Court Cards, and Carol Pearson’s 12 Archetypes fit perfectly. There are three kinds of Archetypes in her system: Ego (dealing with how we relate to others,) Soul (how we relate to ourselves,) and Self (how we integrate both parts into a complete whole.) These became the Jack, Queen, and King cards, respectively.

The Court cards are as follows (alternative names from other systems in parentheses):

Short Game:

Jack - The Youth (The Everyman/Member)
Queen - The Lover (The Lover)
King - The Trickster (The Jester)

Mid Game:

Jack - The Champion (The Hero/Warrior)
Queen - The Renegade (The Outlaw)
King - The Magician (The Magician)

Long Game:

Jack - The Guardian (The Caregiver)
Queen - The Prophet (The Creator/Artist)
King - The Sovereign (The Ruler)

Deep Game:‍

Jack - The Disciple (The Innocent)
Queen - The Nomad (The Explorer)
King - The Sage (The Sage)

‍

The Court cards represent the individual at three stages in their Journey. The Jack corresponds with the Ace, the Queen with the spot between cards 5 and 6, and the King with card 10. As a person progresses through their development within each Game’s Journey, they identify with the traits of each archetype and can use them as a tool to reflect and grow.

Once this was settled, we had the basic structure of the deck sorted out!
‍

The Journey of the Short Game - The Master Trickster

A: Character

2: The Beginner

3: Naivete

4: Authenticity

5: Deficiency

6: Growth

7: Vulnerability

8: Compassion

9: Devotion

10: The Master

J: The Youth

Q: The Lover

K: The Trickster
‍

The Journey of the Mid Game - The Magician’s Machine

A: Creativity

2: The Tool

3: Convention

4: Innovation

5: Decay

6: Repair

7: Vision

8: Invention

9: Craftsmanship

10: The Machine

J: The Champion

Q: The Renegade

K: The Magician

‍

The Journey of the Long Game - The Myth of the Sovereign

A: Conviction

2: The Quest

3: Fear

4: Resolve

5: Defeat

6: Rise

7: Duty

8: Purpose

9: Excellence

10: The Myth

J: The Guardian

Q: The Prophet

K: The Sovereign

‍

The Journey of the Deep Game - The Sage and the Mystery

A: Curiosity

2: The Question

3: Ignorance

4: Humility

5: Doubt

6: Faith

7: Truth

8: Meaning

9: Wonder

10: The Mystery

J: The Disciple

Q: The Nomad

K: The Sage

‍

The next task was to design the cards. Originally, this wasn’t supposed to be my job, I was just meant to figure out the deck system and write the corresponding book, but the person who was meant to do it dropped the ball, and I ended up having to design the entire deck myself. This turned out to be a fortunate occurrence, because it pushed me to develop an entirely new skill set and learn how to design not only the cards, but the packaging and the book, too.


Bad things lead to good things in time.

The first thing I did with regards to the deck was to turn the existing FourGame mandalas into the new FourGame suit symbols. From there, I used the gradient colors from the suits to color the cards, and that basically gave us the deck. Initially, I designed the cards (and everything else) in Figma, but once we started manufacturing, I ended up having to rebuild absolutely everything (several times) in Adobe Illustrator.

Good things lead to bad things- such is life. The cycle continues.

The FourGames Deck Playbook

I started writing the booklet, and it was originally meant to be 100 pages. It ended up at 162 pages of essentially full-page text. The book is dense, and it covers everything from the meaning of the original symbols, the Four Games, the Archetypes, the meaning of each type of card, and the meaning of every individual card in each game. It’s extremely thorough, but it’s the book that makes the cards so magical when you use them.

Around this point, Jamie also requested that we add in two Jokers and 8 modifier cards (Is, Isn’t, Kinda Like, Comes From, Leads To, Ha!, Huh?, and Handy Quote) which are used as a way to map out ideas with the deck. The modifiers are a little harder to explain, but they make more sense when you’re playing with the deck. This put us at our final total of 62 cards per deck.

‍


The book took ages to write, but when that was done (about a year from the start of the project in November of 2020,) it was time to start the arduous process of manufacturing. I found us a manufacturer of cards from Alibaba, and proceeded to go back and forth with them for months. They sent over templates for the packaging, and I set about designing the packaging and then redesigning everything in Illustrator for the first time.

We put down the deposit and they took our first set of files. We then proceeded to exchange emails and revise the deck over and over again until every single card was edited 10 more times and every color, vector, font, and detail was perfect. Along the way, we printed out a few copies of the deck using MakePlayingCards.com (highly recommended, they were really high quality,) so we could finally playtest the damn thing:


‍

It worked! Not only did it work, it works about as well as a Tarot deck, with the major difference being that it’s substantially less vague than a Tarot deck (which has multiple meanings per card and relies on the interpreter to make sense of it.) The way the book is written, each card asks you to reflect on certain human universals, like Defeat, Growth, Meaning, and Purpose. Everyone will, at some point in their life, find themselves in the shoes of archetypes like the Lover or the Guardian, and they’ll come to meet with a Dark Night and it's Dawn, or a Burden and the Gift that comes with it. No magic required, other than the magic life is already full of.

Finally, after many months of revisions, the deck was completed. As I write this, I’m going to be sending the final payment this week and we should have the order of 500 completed before the beginning of November, the two-year mark. Ah, at long last, we’re done.


‍

This has been the most demanding task I’ve done in my entire life, bar none. The level of precision and attention to detail required to bring a product from concept to reality is a much higher-level task than I’ve ever had to do in my work before, and I learned a lot. On top of that, as someone who has written two books by just writing articles and putting them together at the end of the year, there’s a huge difference between doing that and writing a single book from start to finish. I have a newfound appreciation for writers and especially editors, it’s ridiculously difficult and I don’t know how people do it all the time.
‍


‍
We should have decks available for public consumption sometime before the end of the year. If you’re interested in getting a deck, or if you’d like to have a chat about your own product, feel free to shoot me an email at garrett@aion.enterprises or schedule a free call, I’d love to talk to you and see if I can help!

For more FourGame fun, follow them on:

YouTube

Twitter

TikTok

Facebook

Instagram


OF SINGLE MIND: CHOICE, FREEDOM, AND THE FUTURE

“To be free at last, at once, in mind and body, and in soul.”
Imagine, for a moment, if the minds of every person in the world were combined into one gargantuan hive-mind. Every nation would be a different region of the brain, responsible for different body functions responsible for keeping a massive human organism alive and functioning. The streets of each city forming the synapses that together superclusters of function, the rural roads weave an intricate system of blood vessels carrying freight-loads of nutrients from the Earth down from processing centers in factories to distribution centers in the form of supermarkets, ending in the individual packets of ATP shaped like steak and eggs in a diner or a quick glucose boost from an ice cream shop.

It’s a loose metaphor, but you can see it if you squint hard enough and tilt your head a bit to the side.

I like to use a much looser version of this metaphor when I’m thinking about how a philosophy, religion, or ideology works in the world at scale. For example, you can consider that, in a human, we generally assume that the brain runs the show and that the rest of the body takes orders from the volitional consciousness of the person running the show. The reality isn’t exactly so clear cut. Other than right now, when I remind you that you’re now breathing consciously (so take a deep diaphragmatic breath into your abdomen and exhale slowly up the spine,) many of the body’s processes run perfectly well without much input from your conscious attention.

The vast majority of the body runs with very few decisions from you, unless you happen to be one of those monks that can stop their heart, it seems. You didn’t have much say in how your body was formed or grew- DNA did that. You don’t have a say in whether your heart beats or your mitochondria (the powerhouse of the cell, thanks public school!) performs critical functions to generate ATP. Barring a decision to consume large amounts of radium or other similarly toxic substances, the body will keep the show running for a good long time with barely any attention paid to your consciousness and desires.

However, that begs the question- if most of the body runs itself, what amount of control do we have, and how is it exercised in practice?

While many modern intellectuals love to dedicate their precious time on this Earth to disproving the existence of consciousness and volition, in practice, we all act as if free will exists and matters. You can try telling your boss that you’re late for work the fifth time this month because reality is a simulation constructed by a malevolent, demiurgic computer programmer and as a result, your consciousness is actually just a hologram designed to trick you into thinking you have free will, but that’s a lame excuse and you can try it again on the very patient people in the unemployment line if you haven’t learned your lesson. Your mileage may vary, choose your own adventure.
‍

Death by Decision
In the land of the living, we exist in a strange place between pure volition and a very large but still functionally finite set of decisions that are provided for us to choose between. Consider the dynamics of television in the 80’s versus the modern Netflix experience. Back in the day, television stations signed off at night, so programming only ran for specific hours during the day. There was a substantially smaller amount of content being produced, and a significantly smaller number of channels and shows to choose from. As a result, most people watched the same shows, and a show like MASH could have the most viewed episode in TV history much more easily, the finale, “Goodbye, Farewell and Amen.” It still holds this record to this day at 105.97 million viewers

Contrast this with the total viewership of Netflix, which currently sits around 214 million, not counting the (presumably many) people who (allegedly) share their login information. According to Netflix, at least 142 million viewers watched Squid Game for at least two minutes. Personally, I didn’t care to watch it, but my girlfriend did, so I guess that counts for a bit. However, contrast the measurements and you’ll realize how staggering the number is for that single episode of MASH.

The show is about 8 hours in length spread across 9 episodes, and Netflix reports a total of 1.65 billion hours watched. Dividing the total length of the show by 8 hours gives us roughly 206M full-length views of the series, and dividing that number by 9 episodes gives us just 22M people who viewed each episode. MASH still pulled in almost five times the views-per-episode of Netflix’s most popular show, ever, than for one episode of a show in the 80’s.

To date, Netflix has roughly 17,000 titles on its streaming service. If those titles were all 90-minute movies, it would take almost three years of non-stop watching to cover them all. If they were all shows with one 10-hour season, it would take you almost 20 years to do so. In reality, it’s a mixture of shorter pieces and some very long, multi-season shows. The average person will spend about 9 years of their life watching TV, so it’s safe to say that even if you dedicated yourself to watching exclusively Netflix content for the rest of your life, you would not likely be able to watch it all.


Why does this matter?
‍

The Paradox of Choice
With the unimaginably large volume of content and products being produced today, the difficulty in making decisions faced by a normal person on any given day approaches infinity with the number of choices we have to make. The average person makes over 35,000 decisions a day, and in the case of Netflix, you could be choosing between a theoretical cap of 17,000 titles.

The paradox of choice is a concept that describes the fact that while we consider the ability to choose a good thing, the more we have to choose from, the less happy we are.

We tend to think that the more choice we have in our lives, the better. However, the opposite is true. One of my perennial examples of this is the toothpaste section at any supermarket- on Walmart’s website, there are 25 pages of types of toothpaste, with 50 items per page. That’s over 1200 types of toothpaste, and other than fluoride-free options (which are the minority,) most have the same active ingredient, fluoride, in the same quantity, which is about .1%. They’re all branded differently and marketed as better for different things, but they’re almost functionally identical. Does the average person have the time, scientific knowledge, or interest to make an informed decision here? What even is an informed decision in this case?

Now, let’s return to our metaphor. The vast majority of your body runs with very little input from you, outside of what you put in it and what you do with it. You can feed yourself  a juicy, delicious, and nutritious prime rib, or you can shoot it up with fentanyl. You can decide to run an ultramarathon, or you can play a VR game for 12 hours a day. You can’t decide how your stomach digests the steak or how your body metabolizes opiates, and you have no control over how your muscles react to lactic acid while running or whether your ocular muscles get strained while playing in the metaverse.

We have choice in the moment, but we have basically no choice with regards to the consequences that result from our decisions. Most people understand this intuitively.

However, there’s a more pernicious concept I want to explore. In the world we live in, you actually don’t have a great deal of choice with regards to the things that are presented to you in the first place. With the exception of the Amish (tied with billionaires for being the happiest group of people, go figure,) you’re likely going to have to own a car (which model will you buy?) and use it to drive to work (where will you work?) past billboards (what will you buy?) and fast food restaurants (what will you eat?) on the way. You’ll likely shop at a supermarket filled predominantly with very manufactured options that cater to the many strange diets in the culture, from low-fat to low-carb, no-meat to high-meat, low sodium, no lactose, no grain, whole grain; on and on, ad infinitum.
‍

Chosen for You: The Illusion of Freedom
There is effectively no way, by participating in the modern world, to avoid being presented with these choices in the first place. There is effectively no way to avoid the products of modern marketing psychology designed to get you to buy sodas which food science engineers design to contain the maximum amount of sugar you can consume without getting sick. There is effectively no way to avoid deciding which identity you want to adopt while wearing clothes, as every store is engineered to sell you not just clothes, but a new way to be, whether it’s the rocker at Hot Topic, the safe professional at Jos. A Bank, or the refined southern gentleman at Brooks Brothers.

You cannot function in the world without being subject to this crushing overwhelm of decisions about anything and everything imaginable. Even your technology is a personality- are you a Mac or a PC? Your car says a lot about you according to the marketers, you wouldn’t want to be a Ford guy, you should buy a Prius because you want people to know you care about the planet, you need to take care of your kids so buy this minivan.

Your identity is for sale, and you’re going to be forced to face so many decisions that you’ll be unable to make a meaningful one. None of the decisions are particularly meaningful, anyway, because you cannot buy meaning in a store.

Imagine if the cells in your body had to choose whether they wanted to be a tongue cell or a lung cell on any given day? Imagine if your cells could decide whether to process healthy nutrients or toxins?  Imagine if there were entire industries of marketing cells dedicated to getting your cells to change into different forms or metabolize toxins instead of healthy food for their own benefit?

We’d call those cells pathogens.
‍

Demopathy: A Profoundly Sick Society
If we can imagine humanity working like a giant body, then humanity is currently very, very sick. Not sick like sick-and-twisted, sick like your grandpa who worked in the coal mines and got black lung. We’re suffering from an illness of society- demopathy, from the Greek words demos and pathos, meaning people and suffering, respectively.

People want to be free to live their lives, love and provide for their families, and have work that isn’t soul crushing or meaningless. Living in a world where you’re surrounded by loaded choices between different flavors of poison isn’t freedom at all.

We have a sickness in our society because we have a fundamental misunderstanding of what health looks like. It doesn’t look like every cell in the body being forced to act like a brain cell, it looks like tongue cells being allowed to be tongue cells and lung cells being allowed to be lung cells. No, everyone doesn’t need to go to college, no, everyone does not need to have the same education, no, everyone does not need to fit into the uniform mold of what one organ of society thinks the others should be.

In the body, our DNA makes us who we are, from every strand of hair to every single inch of skin. It has the instructions to build our entire being inside each and every cell. What we do with our body and what we feed it only determines if we live up to the potential of our DNA or we cripple it with low-quality nutrients and inputs.

In our society, our culture is our DNA. When society has a clear, healthy culture with a shared vision, that DNA lives in every individual and we’re able to go about the work of being what we’re meant to be, whether that’s a carpenter, a fisherman, a doctor, or a leader, because we’re all working from one blueprint to build something beautiful together. When we’re being attacked by pathogens, that blueprint is corrupted, and instead we’re tricked into building a life that isn’t the one we were meant to build. We give up the bonds to our family, to our friends, and instead trade it for the false set of infinite choices that leave us exposed to the manipulations of those who dedicate their lives to exploiting the most vulnerable.

We are all the vulnerable, we’re all being manipulated and exploited by people in our society whether we realize it or not, and even the people doing the manipulating are victims, too. The marketing and this false culture is so pervasive, so ubiquitous that it’s everywhere and yet somehow invisible, like air.

We’ve fractured into factions, we fight ourselves because we don’t realize we’re all part of something larger than ourselves, we’re all part of one family, one culture, one great being called humanity that is meant to build one beautiful vision together, a shared blueprint of a better world.
‍

Metasystem Transition: The Pivotal Moment of History
We’re standing at the forefront of a great change in the way society is structured. This is called a metasystem transition, which means the change that happens when society moves from one way of being into another. It’s a turning point in history, like the move from kings to presidents after the Enlightenment, or the move from the country to the cities of the industrial revolution. However, this one is particularly important, because for better or for worse, we have a choice to make this time.

Right now, the way things are going, it looks like we’re going to move from the nation state model of representative democracies into some kind of corporate oligarchical global system. Currently, there are companies that exert an enormous amount of influence over our system by deciding who gets funded, what products get made, and how they are marketed to the vulnerable people of the world. One of these companies, Blackrock, an investment management firm, manages so many assets that if they were a country, they would be the third largest by GDP after the US and China.

Blackrock has a stake in almost 5,000 companies, and it uses this investment to get access to those companies’ boards, where they have the ability to influence how those companies operate. They hijack the boards and suggest company actions, and through this process they’re able to change the way the world works, day by day.

If we keep going in this direction, we end up in some sort of global consumerist state, a sort of neo-feudalism. This is a state where people like Bill Gates (the largest private owner of farmland in the US) control where your food is produced and companies like Blackrock and other institutional investors buy up private housing, then rent it back to you. In the words of Ida Aucken, writing for the World Economic Forum, “you'll own nothing and you'll be happy.”

What does the alternative look like?

Right now, we’re suffering from the tyranny that comes with too much choice. We idealize a perfectly democratic system where everyone can vote on everything, but in reality, as long as there are predatory, manipulative people who can gain power by coercion and marketing, democracy leads us exactly where we are right now. We get a body in which the tongue and lung cells are asked to be brain cells, and instead of being free to live their lives, they’re made to be the targets in a system that incentivizes their manipulation as a means by which the manipulators can acquire power, status, and wealth.

In a system where every person votes and the electees gain power, then the person most likely to be elected is the one will do, say, or become whatever they have to to get elected. Most reasonable people don’t trust politicians, and why should you? What’s worse, even though we know they’re not trustworthy, we continue to elect them. We fight passionately over which wolf should run the henhouse and wonder why nothing gets better.

You would not let an unethical salesman into the house of your grandmother, but they get in every day on television and the internet, streaming speeches that a team of people wrote with practiced hand-gestures and tone designed to convince you that they’re different, that they deserve your vote, and that they care about you. That’s their job, they get power when they’re good enough to trick you into voting for them. 

“Of course, all politicians are corrupt, I’m not naive. My politician is different, though, they’re not like those cronies in DC…”

What does a healthy body look like? Contrary to what advertising would sell you, it doesn’t look like a Calvin Klein ad. It looks like a body that digests your food, gets you sleep at night, carries you through a day of work, and has the ability to provide for and love your family. It’s a body that lets you relax when the day is done, enjoy the sunlight on a warm spring day, or keep you warm on a cold autumn night.

What does a healthy society look like? A healthy society looks like one in which it’s easy for people to be healthy, have healthy families and friends, and to live in a way that’s authentic to them. It’s a society where individuals aren’t asked to be something other than what they are, or where they’re shamed for being the kind of people they were born to be. Whether that means you’re an artist who likes the city life or a farmer in the country, you should have the freedom to be what you are, and be free from the influence of those who want to sell you an identity, a lifestyle, and the guilt that comes along with their sales tactics. It looks like freedom from being asked to make synthetic choices between different kinds of poison, whether that’s fake politicians, fake food, or fake identities.
‍

A Vision of Tomorrow
I want you to really imagine what the world would look like if you were really free from so many of the oppressive, sometimes invisible bad choices we have forced on us. 

Imagine not having to wonder if your food was good for you? Imagine never having to worry whether your clothes were made in a sweatshop by slaves, or if your technology broke because it’s designed to fall apart after a certain amount of time? Imagine freedom from a convoluted tax code that’s designed to protect the rich, or freedom from lobbyists influencing the nutritional guidelines to convince you that poison is healthy when it’s branded correctly.

Imagine freedom from the despair of worrying about a broken system and the sweeping sense of powerlessness that so many of us feel. Imagine freedom from being told what to do with your life by strangers who couldn't care less about you unless it benefits them. Imagine freedom from the ultra-wealthy and corporations who want you to own nothing and rent everything so you stay in debt and beholden to them until you die.

I want you to imagine a world where the best person for the job is actually in charge, a world where our leaders are competent instead of being the butt of jokes, a world where you feel a deep connection to your community, your society, and the world.

It might be hard to imagine, but somewhere inside of you I hope there’s still a part that believes that, crazy as it may seem, it’s possible for life to be good, for the world to make sense, and for you to be free, truly free. It’s not the world we live in right now, but it could be if we could decide to be who we really are instead of what the worst of us want us to be. A culture united, not divided. One body, working together to be healthy, happy and free.

‍

“Believe, believe,
That life can change,
That you're not stuck in vain.

Believe, believe,
In the resolute urgency of now.”
-Tonight, Tonight by The Smashing Pumpkins
What we are doing now is not working, we can continue to try it until it kills us but there’s no other way to move forward without changing it that doesn’t lead to the subordination and servitude of every man, woman, and child to corporate entities, politicians, activists, and the rich in a system designed to crush you with the illusion of freedom.

We have to return to what we really are at our core. We have to return to genuine individualism, not personalities you can buy at the mall. We have to return to genuine communities, not the political tribes of a dying nation. Return to a true love for life and freedom, for humanity, and for the future of life itself.
‍

“Do not let your fire go out, spark by irreplaceable spark in the hopeless swamps of the not-quite, the not-yet, and the not-at-all. Do not let the hero in your soul perish in lonely frustration for the life you deserved and have never been able to reach. The world you desire can be won. It exists… it is real… it is possible… it's yours.”
― Ayn Rand


MINIMUM VIABLE BRAND: HOW TO BRAND YOUR NEW BUSINESS PAINLESSLY

One of the two mistakes I see many early founders and entrepreneurs making are either spending too little time or too much money on brand for their startups & small businesses. I say this as someone who sells branding to founders and entrepreneurs, so while this advice may result in reducing the number of clients I’ll have in the future, I think the possibility of early businesses saving money, and perhaps more importantly, not being terribly hard to look at, is worth the risk in my book.

I want to introduce the idea of Minimum Viable Brand as a concept to aim at. Typically, when newer entrepreneurs talk about branding, they think that means a logo. However, what the average person considers to be a logo is actually two different brand elements in a trenchcoat:

First, we have the graphic element you’d typically call a logo, which is a logomark. The example below is from a Crypto marketing agency we branded called SmartBlocks:


SmartBlocks
Next, we have the logotype, which is the combination of the business name and a particular font chosen for the brand:
‍


‍

Finally, we have the combination of the two, which you can call the combination mark:


When you’re first starting out, entrepreneurs tend to go wrong in one of two directions. The most common of these for the older generation of entrepreneurs (and especially small business owners) is to ignore branding almost entirely, which leads to very confusing experiences for potential customers. You wouldn’t go to a job interview wearing a stained shirt and cargo shorts, so think of your brand like your business’ uniform and realize that any time someone sees it, you’re in a job interview. Potential users, customers, and clients are always getting information about you when they’re interacting with you, and if that information says “this company isn’t legitimate” or “this guy looks hungover,” you can imagine how that’s going to impact their future decisions to do business with you or trust you with their time and money.

The opposite of that mistake is the one I tend to see younger entrepreneurs make, including myself when I was starting out. This mistake is to go overboard with branding, and the reason people think they need to do this is because in today’s post-Apple market, people have realized the value and importance of being really well-branded. It’s an easy mistake to make- everyone wants to make a great impression. However, you can think of over-branding an early-stage business like buying a tuxedo for a job interview when you’re already broke. It’s not worth the investment and unless you can back up the statement you’re making, you’re shooting yourself in the foot.

If you understand the basic rules of professional fashion, you could go get a perfectly acceptable outfit at WalMart and land the job. In the same vein, you can learn some basic rules of design, get a little bit scrappy, and make a perfectly presentable Minimum Viable Brand.

Let’s break your brand down into the basics. We’re going to need the following:
‍

Step 1: A basic understanding of your brand’s essence

Step 2: A logotype and one or two secondary fonts plus a color palette

Bonus Step: A branded email signature [EASY]

‍Bonus Step: Branded social media profile and banner pictures [INTERMEDIATE]

‍Bonus Step: A basic website so people can find you and your offering [CHALLENGING]

‍

Sounds easy enough, right? If you can nail these four things, you’ll be in much better shape than most of the companies I see in my day-to-day work, and I look at hundreds every month. You would be surprised at how often people get this wrong- so let’s help you get started with a leg-up over your competitors.

Before we get into the brand itself, we’re going to run through a trimmed-down version of one of the business philosophy sprints I run with my clients, the Alpha Sprint. I use this exercise as a way to get to the heart of what a business cares about, because good branding is the visual and verbal expression of a business’ invisible philosophy. It’s a way for you to communicate what you do, what you care about, and what experience you’re trying to give to your customers.

I’ve created a series of worksheets in Figma, a free, collaborative graphic design tool that I personally use for everything and highly recommend- most designers use this nowadays and it is truly phenomenal. You’re welcome to follow along with the rest of this article by clicking this link, otherwise, you can use pen and paper or your preferred choice of graphic design tool- even Google Docs will work for most of this. I’ll also explain Figma in a bit more detail later in this article. For the next section, we’ll be using the Step 1 worksheet below:

Get the Minimum Viable Brand worksheet in Figma here!
‍



Step 1: Brand Essence
First, we’re going to outline your values- you should aim to have 3-7 one-word values, these should be things you and your business deeply care about. Good examples of values are things like “excellence” or “compassion,” bad examples are buzzwords like “synergy” and “innovation” which sound cool but don’t mean much to your customers. Words are important, and every synonym means something slightly different, whether it’s in the connotation or just the way the word sounds. Assertive, dominant, confident, and aggressive are all in the same family, but they have very different meanings. A good example- Domino’s Pizza’s central value is “dominate,” and as a result, they’re a very masculine company in comparison to Pizza Hut, which is more family-oriented and somewhat wholesome.

Once you’ve got your 3-7 values, create short, pithy value statements (I call these axioms) that help to explain what that value means. For example, if your value is “honesty,” your axiom could be “honesty is the best policy,” “always tell the truth,” or “we will tell customers that their baby is ugly, even if it hurts.” The key here is to keep them short and catchy, and your goal is to let your future employees and customers know what your value means to you. These form the basis of how you communicate what you care about, whether that’s in marketing materials, website copy, or even in the way you act in the day-to-day experience of running your business. They help with hiring, with advertising, and with ensuring you’re always staying true to the things you care about when times get tough.

Here are the values and axioms I created with Dan Rhoads, an insurance salesman and financial advisor as an example:
‍


‍
Next, we’re going to talk about why your company exists with a mission statement. I like to structure these as a sentence (sometimes a run-on) that starts with “Our mission is to…” and follows Simon Sinek’s Golden Circle/Start with Why concept.

Here’s one I did for Prismatica, an NFT Trading Card Game company that’s changing the way we collectively interact with storytelling in multiplayer gaming:

‍Our mission is to:
WHY - immerse the world in the foundation of what makes us human
HOW - through storytelling, collective myth-making, and desire-driven economics
WHAT -  as a Web3 game development studio.
‍
I like to think of a mission statement as the one-sentence elevator pitch. It should be the shortest possible explanation of WHY you’re working on what you’re working on, HOW you use processes and methods to accomplish it, and WHAT you’re literally doing. When you get this right, the WHY section should be an emotional hook, the HOW should explain some of the things you do well, or do differently than your competitors. Finally, the WHAT should be a black and white, buzzword-free description of your company. People tend to either struggle with WHY things or WHAT things, so if you’re a WHY person, force yourself to be as literal as humanly possible, and if you’re a WHAT person, make sure that your WHY section is purely emotional, big-picture and not “to make money by providing a service.” Ask yourself WHY you really care about solving this problem or providing this service in particular.

Once you’ve got that, we’ll move on to your company’s vision. This is an aspiration, emotionally-charged picture of what it looks like 100 years from now when you’re dead and your company has conquered the world. I like to frame these as short sentences starting with the words “Our vision is a world where…” and structured to really give people an idea of what kind of feeling they’ll get out of working with you. Obviously, a plumbing company isn’t going to have the same epic narrative as SpaceX, but even Sherwin-Williams, a paint company, has the words “Cover the Earth” in their logo, so there’s certainly room to dream here.

Here’s a vision statement I did with iMERS, a metaverse trading game:

‍A world where players anywhere can experience the thrill of trading in a competitive metaverse, develop superior trading skills, and become the next generation of trading superstars.
Next, we’re going to move into the trinity of brand elements, personality, visual identity, and verbal identity. For these three, I want you to take a few minutes and pretend (seriously) that your brand is a flesh-and-blood human person who you’ve been hanging out with for the last hour. Once you’ve done this for a bit, write down 7-15 bits for each of the following:

‍‍

What is your brand’s personality?
Describe how it acts; what would it do at a party? Does it even go to parties? (Is it: funny, serious, eccentric, bizarre, antisocial, hypermasculine, huggable, wishy-washy, commitment-phobic, tense, ponderous, wistful, etc.?)

‍

What does your brand look like?
Describe what it’s wearing. (Does it wear: slacks, shorts, a button-up, a dress, a Canadian tuxedo, a bear costume, all pink, etc? Include two or three colors here.)

‍‍

What does your brand sound like?
Describe how it speaks. (Is it: formal, informal, loquacious, terse, relaxed, tense, grandiloquent, spartan, jargon-y, accented, scientific, rural, posh, nerdy, common, etc.)

Don’t overthink these three, they don’t need to be perfect, your goal is just to create a sort of caricature of your brand: not a caricature in the sense of a drawing with a big head that you got on the Venice Beach boardwalk, but in that you should be aiming to emphasize the distinctive characteristics that are unique to your brand.

As an exercise, let’s imagine the difference between the following:

Personality:

How are the personalities of the following brands different? How are they similar?‍

Coke vs Pepsi vs Sprite

Apple vs Microsoft vs Google

Tesla vs Ford vs Ferrari

Visual Identity:

How are the visual identities of the following brands different? How are they similar?

WalMart vs Target vs Best Buy

McDonald’s vs Burger King vs Arby’s

Facebook vs Youtube vs Twitter vs TikTok

Verbal Identity:

How are the verbal identities of the following brands different? How are they similar?‍

Arby’s vs Sonic vs Hardee’s/Carl’s Jr.

Lincoln vs Chevy vs the Honda Fit

Geico vs Progressive vs Liberty Mutual


(A note: Arby’s is a wonderfully executed example of doing things right for their target audience, and the person who runs their social media account is an actual, factual wizard.)

https://www.foodbeast.com/news/arbys-social-media/


At this point, assuming you’ve completed the above exercises, you should have a much better understanding of the core details that you’re trying to communicate with your brand! It’s a decent amount of work, but this makes all the difference between you and your competitors who won’t put in the effort. Great job, dear reader.

Now that we’ve covered the heart of your brand, let’s talk about how we’re going to execute it and make something beautiful, or if you’re not artistically-inclined, how to avoid making something catastrophically ugly.

Before we do that, one word of advice-

If you are a founder, you are likely one of two types of people: the person who does everything themselves, or the person who understands how to delegate effectively. You should aim to be capable of being person one when you have to, but you must learn to be person two if you’re going to succeed.

I say this for two reasons:

One, it’s important advice that took me a long time to learn.

Two, if you’re not above average at design, or if you don’t consider yourself to be a particularly artistic or creative person, that’s okay, just be capable of acknowledging that you’re not the best at it, and double down on what you are good at instead.

A huge reason that lots of poorly-branded companies exist is because founders are either too stubborn to outsource or they don’t realize that they have bad taste and thus don’t know what good design looks like. This happens way more than you probably realize. It’s worth understanding that at some point you’re probably going to have to work with designers, and you will be better off learning how to let them do their jobs and trust that they know what they’re doing. When in doubt, hold up your design next to a company at the top of your industry and ask if they’re really comparable, or post it in either r/baddesigns or Graphic Design Is My Passion and get some honest feedback.

With that out of the way, it’s time for me to do my absolute best to prevent you from doing anything terribly complicated or difficult, so let’s make you a Minimum Viable Brand.
‍

Step 2: Logotype & Colors

First things first, we’re going to assume you have a name for your company! If so, great, if not, you should figure that out and meet me back here once you do.

We’re going to take the name of your company and turn it into a logotype. For this part of the exercise, we’ll be using the Step 2 worksheet:

If you have any prior experience using fonts other than the default fonts that come with your computer, you’re welcome to substitute your own, but I’ll assume you’re not for the sake of simplicity, so we’ll use Google Fonts, which are free and easy to use in most cases.

https://fonts.google.com/

There are two basic kinds of fonts that you need to know, Serif and Sans-Serif. A serif is the little pip that comes off of letters in a font like Times New Roman, and Sans-Serif fonts like Helvetica lack those pips. Serif fonts tend to look more old-fashioned, prestigious, and serious, while Sans-Serif fonts look more modern, futuristic, and approachable. This is the first choice for you to make with your brand, but try out both and see what feels right.



Reem Kufi, the sans-serif logotype we use at Aion, vs Garamond, a Serif typeface
‍
When you’re choosing a font in Google Fonts, pay attention to a few things:

Is the font legible? It doesn’t matter if it looks cool if no one can read it.

Is the font clean or distressed? If your brand is edgy, you may want a distressed font, but if you’re a spine surgeon, you probably want to convey precision and professionalism.

Is the font serious or playful? If your brand is a cupcake bakery, you probably want something on the fun side, but you may not want to look lackadaisical if you’re a tax attorney.

Think back to the personality and visual identity of your brand while making this choice- you should pick a font that evokes the traits you’re trying to convey.

Once you’ve chosen your logotype font, you can select that font in Figma using the provided template and we can start experimenting. I’ve included both a black font on white and a white font on black so you can see what the logotype looks like in two different use-cases. Ideally, good design is flexible and works in multiple different scenarios.

With the logotype, you can experiment with different weights of the font, like BOLD, italic, or LIGHT, which can change the impression you’re giving. Lighter weights suggest a softer or premium feel, while bolder fonts are stronger and more intense.

Once you’ve settled on a logotype, we’re going to select one or two additional fonts to use as your Title + Subtitle fonts, as well as your paragraph or body text font. If you’re new to fonts, feel free to choose one font for all three, or if you’re feeling adventurous, you can find a different font for each. Ideally, you should choose a font with multiple weights so your paragraph can be a normal weight and your titles can be either bold or light. In the Step 2 worksheet, I’ve used only Open Sans, a Google Font, for every use-case to show you that using different weights can go a long way.

If you have a Sans-Serif logotype, you can use a Serif font for your titles + paragraph to increase the seriousness of the brand. Vice-versa, if you have a Serif font for your logotype, you can use a Sans-Serif to increase the readability or to tone down the brand. If you decide to do both Sans-Serif or both Serif, be cautious in your choice of font, it’s slightly harder to match complementary fonts together this way, in my experience. Remember to think about what you’re trying to convey with the choice of fonts.

Once you’ve gotten your fonts selected, we’re going to move on to color selection for your brand. If you’ve followed the instructions to this point, you’ll have two or three colors from the Visual Identity portion of Step 1, so we’re going to take those colors and find them in Coolors.co, a really handy color palette picking app that will prevent you from picking colors that don’t go well together. I am not as good at color picking as I am at other elements of the design process, so I use this personally from time to time, and I think it’s very helpful.

Once you’ve pulled up Coolors, click the “Start the Generator” button and we’ll get to work. Press the space bar to randomize the colors, and once you see one that you like, click the lock icon on that color to lock it it. When you lock a color, the other colors in the generator will all be complementary shades that match that color, which is pretty neat! Additionally, if you get a color that’s close but not exact, you can click the 3x3 grid icon on that color to view alternate shades of that color, so it’s easy to find exactly what you’re looking for.

Run through this a few times until you find your colors, then copy the six character hex code (a standard format for naming colors in design) over into the Figma file and change the color of the four gray squares at the bottom of the Step 2 frame to your brand’s colors.

I’ve set 6 color styles in the Figma file, these are:

Primary - #444444

Secondary - #888888

Accent 1 - #BBBBBB

Accent 2 - #EEEEEE

Light - #FDFFFC

Dark - #150A04

Here are some instructions on how to change the color styles. In Figma, color styles allow you to color multiple elements at the same time and change the colors all at once. When you change the color styles to your brand colors, you’ll see all the instances of your color in the Step 2 frame change simultaneously, so you can see if your colors work well together. The most important are the Primary, Secondary, Light, and Dark, if these don’t have good contrast, the logotype will be very hard to see.



‍
Personally, I don’t like to use pure white (#FFFFFF) or pure black (#000000) in most cases, it tends to remind you you’re looking at a computer screen or looks strange in print, so I recommend choosing a LIGHT and DARK color at the very far end of your brand’s PRIMARY or SECONDARY color’s shade list in Coolors, but this is an advanced tip and you can ignore it if that seems too complicated. When in doubt, simple works best.

Once you’ve got your colors sorted out, feel free to experiment with changing the color and weight of different parts of your logotype to get some element of style. If you have multiple words in your business name, this can be very effective. Whatever you do, just make sure the words are visible on both the LIGHT and DARK backgrounds. If certain colors work on one and not the other, consider using different shades for each use-case.

Alright, that’s your basic Minimum Viable Brand! It may not look like much, but that combination of fonts and colors is enough to handle most everything you’ll need to get started, and it’s more than many small businesses have thought out. Most importantly, it’s simple enough that it’s much harder to screw up.


Bonus Step: Branded Email Signature with Hubspot
Hubspot offers this really simple-to-use email signature generator that I highly recommend. I’ve included in the Step 3 worksheet in the Figma file some branded Profile Picture templates with instructions on how to add your picture to them below the worksheet. Feel free to use these if you like, I enjoy them but they’re totally optional and based on your personal taste.

Otherwise, just use a normal headshot of yours. Also included in the worksheet are the light and dark versions of your logotype so you can export them for the signature.


Bonus Step: Branded Templates with Envato Elements
If you’re feeling adventurous and want to go a bit further with branding your business, I cannot recommend a subscription to Envato Elements higher than any individual use of your time and money. You can get templates for graphics, stock photos,  video, and music, professional fonts, presentations, and even animation templates for only $16.50/m or about $200/yr. It is the absolute best bang for your buck and while it’s a bit more complicated to use some of these things, if you know how to, it dramatically improves the quality of your brand. For example, you can get templates for social media layouts and recolor them using your handy new brand colors! A slightly easier and lower quality but still workable way to do social media content is using Canva or Adobe Spark.


Bonus Step: Webflow Website Template
This is the most difficult of the bonus steps but in my opinion, if you can manage it, will have the highest degree of benefit from a design perspective- using Webflow to get a website template. Templates range from free to $24-129 (one time), and they also provide web hosting. There is a free option here as well, but to get the proper sort of hosting it’s $15-$45/mo for a normal site and $42-$235/mo for a site with eCommerce functionality. Most people that I work with pay no more than the $15 option, the higher options are for very large sites with lots of traffic or purchases, so if you ever get to that threshold, I guarantee the site will be paying for itself.

https://webflow.com/templates‍

The reason why I recommend Webflow so enthusiastically is because even the most basic Webflow template is better designed than 90% of websites, they have a very strict set of standards that makes them all excellent and relatively easy to customize. This is not the simplest thing in the world, so be warned- if you’re not fairly computer literate, you may want to find a younger family member to help or outsource this part.

The most critical feature of Webflow that makes this as simple as possible is their templates’ Style Guide page. You can go on that page and add in your brand colors and fonts, then change the copy on the site and voila, you have a professional grade website in a relatively short amount of time!

(If you’ve followed the tutorial up to this point and you’re interested in doing a Webflow template or working with Envato Elements but you’re struggling, please feel free to reach out to me, I’m happy to help and will consult with you for free.)


THE IDIOT AND THE PSYCHOPATH

I was once told that contracts exist not because of a lack of trust between the parties of a contract, but as a statement of the trust between the parties.

Strange, but it seems true.

Let’s imagine you’re entering into a business relationship with someone who emphatically promises you that you don’t need a contract because they’re fully trustworthy and that it would only complicate the relationship. You may see immediately where this might be problematic, but let’s pretend it’s not obvious.

If you don’t have an employment contract, for example, then your salary and benefits may be subject to hearsay and the hope that the courts will enforce a handshake deal. It happens, but hope is not a strategy. If you don’t have a financial contract with a broker and records of the transactions, who’s to say that you actually paid them anything at all or that you even have a financial relationship? If you don’t have a governmental contract with the people who dictate your rights, taxes, and general quality of life, well… you don’t, at least not really.

What does that say about how much trust exists in our relationship to the political system? We have a Constitution which, for all intents and purposes, was a somewhat one-sided contract at least created in good faith with the people of the nation. However, it’s a fungible contract and functionally, at least in practice, only alterable by the side that issued the contract.

What’s more, it is realistically impossible for a normal person to know all the terms and conditions of said contract (which does not require your consent or signature to be in effect, by the way) without having dedicated their lives to the study of the law, and even among those who have done so, it’s certainly not the majority that know the law in full.

The average person breaks the law without knowing about five times a week, something like 260 times per year. Thus, everyone is in breach of a contract that they do not understand, have reasonably limited access to the full text of, and as a result, everyone is a criminal waiting to be prosecuted by the side of the contract that has the power of the institution that issues the contract on their side.

Here’s a thought experiment that you can use to imagine whether this contract bears any semblance to legitimacy:

In a free market, people have the ability to choose things like their school, their profession, their home, and so on. The degree to which our markets are free is a topic for a different discussion, so we’ll refer to our market as a free-enough market. One generally does not get assigned housing by the government, you’re not forced into a trade, and while a decent amount of the educational system is based on regional assignment, there’s some degree of school choice, especially at the highest levels of academia.

Compare this to the government- at best, you can decide to move to a different state with more amicable laws, but as a result of things like the Interstate Commerce clause and the general expansion of the Federal government since the New Deal, the substantive differences between states has been decreasing.

Consider the government in relation to an employer. If you don’t like an employer’s management structure, you’re free to find a new one. I won’t debate the difficulty in finding new employers here, so whether it’s easy to do so isn’t the point- there’s not (yet, at least) a Directive 10-289 making it illegal to quit your job. If you really want to find a new job, it can be done. However, there is no such freedom in finding a new government, and unlike in business, creating your own is about the most illegal thing conceivable. You can go to another country through much effort and pain, but there isn’t much of a competitive market for styles of government- most in the western world are close enough in nature, and because of the interoperative layer of global political alignment (compare loosely to Interstate Commerce,) the differences between at least western countries will continue to diminish.

One recalls the notion of “government of the people, by the people, and for the people,” as a thought here- if there’s nowhere else to meaningfully go, then we may as well attempt to change the government we have.

Here’s another thought experiment for you, and believe it or not, it works regardless of your feelings about either of the subjects:

Consider the elections of President Trump and President Biden.

By the account of most people, Donald Trump is a Washington outsider, and depending on your political leaning, either a brilliant businessman or a narcissistic idiot.

If he is a genuine outsider and a brilliant businessman, why is it that he was unable to change the system in a meaningful way?
If he is a genuine outsider and a narcissistic idiot, why is it that he was able to be elected at all?
By the account of most people, Joe Biden is a career politician, and depending on your political leaning, either a highly-effective legislator or someone actively in the throes of dementia.

If he is a career politician and a highly-effective legislator, why is it that he is unable to change the system in a meaningful way?
If he is someone actively in the throes of dementia, why is it that he was able to be elected at all?
The average person likely believes either the first Trump point and the second Biden point, or the inverse. It’s been my experience, however, that my readership consists of very intelligent and thoughtful people, so perhaps you see more nuance in your positions on these statements. Fortunately, I don’t particularly care what your opinions are on this thought experiment for me to make my point!

The thrust is thus:

One tends to believe either that the system has to be changed with someone from the outside or the inside. We have and have had, in recent times, one of each. If neither a savvy insider nor a high-functioning outsider can change the system, who can? If a fool and a senile old man can be elected, how does the system even work?

The system is change-resistant and functionally broken.
No one person can comprehend the entirety of it, the best that people can do is understand enough of it to leverage some modicum of power for their own benefit and the benefit of their financiers, constituents, and base. Thus, either no one can change the system or no one is willing to change the system.

It’s not a novel metaphor, but the nature of a system that grows without restraint and is resistant to change and all attempts to halt its growth is easily likened to metastatic cancer in the body.

We are either ruled by idiots who cannot cure the cancer,
or psychopaths who do not care to attempt a cure.
In more simple terms, there are two enemies afoot here:

ignorance (the idiots)
malice (the psychopaths)
Because we have a government based on a one-sided contract written in good faith, the contract is ripe for exploitation, either by ignorance or by malice. Good-natured idiots can unknowingly break the rules, and bad-natured manipulators can twist them for their own gain. What is needed isn’t the naive hope that someone can fix the contract, but a new contract that is actually designed to protect the weaker party in the arrangement.

If only there existed a system of contracts that didn’t require trust to execute…


THE FREE KING

The name of this project (Liber Liber Rex) is a bit of a play on words.

First, because “Liber” means both “Free” and “Book,” as in Liberty and Library, respectively. (I don’t speak enough Latin to know if this is conjugated correctly, if you do, please feel free to email me a more correct translation. I figured that since it’s a dead language most people wouldn’t mind terribly.)

Second, because the notion of a Free King is a bit of an oxymoron. We tend to imagine a King as someone who has an immense amount of freedom, but I tend to think that’s a naïve way of looking at things.

Let’s use King as a stand-in for singular leadership here- you can replace King with President, CEO, Prime Minister, or just leader in general as you see fit. I like King because there’s a particular sort of ownership and a greater degree of inseparability from the people than you find with Presidents, who are eminently replaceable. Consider the myth of the Fisher King, who, as a result of a wound, is made lame, and his kingdom withers in kind.

In most mythological (and perhaps esoteric) contexts, the King represents the focal point through which the divine order flows. The King is symbolized as the center of the Kingdom, often with a circle quartered by a cross (the alchemical symbol for Earth, the solar cross, and similar to a Celtic cross as well) which represents the king radiating our this channeled divine order to the four corners of the Kingdom in the four cardinal directions.

What is being said here is effectively that the nature of reality is an ordered system (which could be called divine order) and that the order of said reality is vested in a human form that best approximates it. This reads as mystical or esoteric, but if you consider even the American presidential elections, each party is selecting a person who best approximates the shared reality of the party members and attempting to vest in them the power to order the kingdom country.

Almost by definition, the King cannot be free. His is to steward the people in good times and often to be sacrificed for them in bad. Sir James Frazer’s The Golden Bough covers the relationship between the sacred role of the King as eventual sacrifice for the Kingdom, and the myth of the Sword of Damocles represents much the same as it depicts the blade that hangs above the head of the monarch, invisible to the people but all too present for the one who graces the throne.

No, the King is not free.
However, many (like Damocles) would challenge that there are many things that the King has that the people do not. This is true, but unlike the freedoms of the barrel-dwelling Diogenes, the luxuries of the King come part and parcel with duties.

Let us consider what the Free King means in this light- liberty and ligation, or more plainly:

Rights and Responsibilities.
We live in a world where these two concepts are almost wholly divorced- the wealthy and powerful are flush with rights and freedoms far in excess of the lower classes. There is no mechanism by which to take them to task to perform any actions in exchange for the freedoms they exercise, let alone the expectation that they should be held to any kind of standard at all. We imagine that after a life of financial success and power that we can finally buy our freedom back from the world and be detached from any obligation to our fellow man, whether with a pension, a retirement, or a private island to hide away on in blessed seclusion.

True freedom belongs only to the renunciant, the homeless and jobless wanderer, and we should respect such an option for those who desire it- no one is free unless everyone is free to wholly renounce the world. However, to live in the world and benefit from the gifts of society and yet offer nothing in return to it, to offer nothing in service, is theft, and should be understood to be equivalent to the robbery that it is.

Marxism and its child ideological variants understand this implicitly, in sentiment- the most reprehensible thing that one can do to a society built on aeons of prosocial evolution is to take without giving, to keep without returning, to lead without serving.

This isn’t simply an evolutionary imperative, it’s a metaphysical one. The nature of reality is, below all other forces, marked by the interplay of energy and entropy. The human race has kindled a fire to warm the world for many years, and to benefit from the warmth of the fire without working to feed and perpetuate it is to steal the gift of warmth from future generation, to enjoy a declining world and side with the chaos that has opposed us from the beginning.

To take without giving is to become the enemy of Life itself.
With this in mind, let us reconsider our Free King-

The Free King is a symbol representing the pinnacle of individual sovereignty over their own life, and the relationship that individual must have with the world. This is an individual who rejects the absolute freedom from responsibility of the renunciate, and instead accepts that he must voluntarily give up his limited concept of self to understand his place in the sum totality of being. Just as the cell that takes without giving to the body a waste, so is the “leader” who profits without service a leader in name only.

This work is an attempt to document a theory around the relationship of the individual is, to one another, to society, and to the world and universe as a whole. If we are going to move forward, we must be ready to go beyond the adolescent irresponsibility that we see writ large in today’s culture and instead develop a vision of human flourishing, service to the thriving of life, and leadership that can be emulated by every member of society, until each of us may become as a Free King.

THE PRICE OF PIZZA AND THE VALUE OF PHILOSOPHY

I spend a lot of time looking at websites and unfortunately, due to the state of most websites, I spend most of that time looking at bad websites. On Wednesdays at 12 EST, I run a business philosophy group in the Triba Business Community Discord, and during that time I’ll audit a few of the top companies in whichever industry the audience picks. I critique their websites, check out their About pages, and when they have it articulated, I go through and analyze the philosophy of the business.

A personal note before I get into it:

While I love the work that I do and despite the fact that I genuinely believe in the importance of business philosophy, most people in the world do not think it’s worth much of anything. In an ideal world, I’d strictly work on business philosophy, but as it stands now, I build websites as a way to provide design services, and I provide design services as a way to offer business philosophy services. Because it’s damn near something that I’ve made up (or in marketing speak: a field that I’m pioneering,) I don’t yet have the metrics and data to be able to prove explicitly that it has value. Intuitively, I know that it has to matter, and while that may simply be my own ego justifying my strange choice of career, I’ve met a number of brilliant, competent people whom I respect immensely who seem to agree that it matters.

At any rate, I’m a bit too stubborn to quit, so I guess we’ll find out the hard way if it’s really worth anything. At least it’s a blue ocean, right?

With that in mind, imagine my surprise when in the process of running my philosophy club and comparing the philosophy of different businesses in the same industry, I came to find something incredibly interesting:

Across all industries that I’ve looked at so far, there is a very high correlation between the quality of a business’ stated philosophy (or whether it is even articulated in the first place) and their ranking in their industry relative to competitors.

Here’s the thing- I, myself, am something of a fanatic about the notion that business philosophy is important, and even I was shocked by how consistently true this fact is. If you had told me a few months ago that this was true I would not have believed you, and yet it’s such a solid predictor of how well the company does that it blows my mind.

Seriously, I promise you you’re going to be shocked by this next part.

A Piece of the (Pizza) Action
My favorite industry that I’ve looked at so far, both because the websites were better than average (for reference, it’s NOT the banking or healthcare industry, because all of those websites look identical- and identically godawful) and because one of the companies in the industry got the only perfect score I’ve given out of the dozens I’ve looked at, is pizza.

Yes, pizza! Why this is, we may never know. It may be due to the innate wholesomeness of pizza in a sort of idealistic sense- probably everyone has a fond memory of pizza at some point in their lives, but who knows?

With that in mind, let’s get into it.

When I started my audit, I went through the big four pizza companies in order: Domino’s, Pizza Hut, Little Caesars, and Papa John’s.

Pizza Power 2013 State of the Industry Report - PMQ Pizza Magazine


In 2018, Pizza Today (which is apparently a website that exists) reported the following ranking and financials:

Domino’s grossed $12,252,100,000 with 14,856 locations
Pizza Hut grossed $12,034,000,000 with 16,748 locations
Little Caesars grossed $4,000,000,000 with 5,500 locations
Papa John’s grossed $3,695,000,000 with 5,199 locations
I’ll give you the abbreviated form of what I got in my audit.

‍

The 2019 Pizza Power Report: A State-of-the-Industry Analysis - PMQ Pizza  Magazine


Pizza Philosophy 101
Domino’s had a very clearly articulated philosophy, with their Alpha (their core concept or essence) being “dominate,” which, while poetic, is a bit aggressive for a pizza company in my opinion. Their company is hypermasculine- they focus on technology, speed, efficiency, and crushing the competition, and they’ve succeeded in that. You can see this ethos in their invention of the 30 minutes or less pitch, as well as in their Noid character, the online time tracker for delivery, and that weird car that has an oven built into it, or whatever it is.

Pizza Hut is more focused on people and a fun, friendly experience than the mechanistic Domino’s, and you can see that in the fact that many Pizza Huts still have an eat-in option. The restaurants themselves are more home-y and cozy, and that ties in well, but they’re only as high on this list as they are due to the number of stores they have- Little Caesars and Papa John’s make almost identical amounts of money per store (which I’ll get into in more detail later,) Pizza Hut just happens to have over three times as many locations as either of them, and even more than Domino’s. They’re established and entrenched, but not terribly well optimized, and their philosophy lacks the laser focus of Domino’s, the simplicity of Caesars, or the core concept that Papa John’s has.

Little Caesars is the most interesting of the four in that their model is simpler and cheaper, and their primary goal seems to be selling franchises. I actually liked their website the most of the four, it’s more modern and there are some nice subtle touches like the LC pattern hidden in the mascot’s toga- that’s the kind of design I get out of bed in the morning for, because details matter. They gross the second most per store out of the four, and frankly are probably a better company than Pizza Hut just based off a few metrics, but they’re far smaller and generally regarded as a sub-par pizza choice by most.

Finally, we have Papa John’s, who also has a core focus- “better ingredients, better pizza.” I quite like this as a clearly-defined value prop.However, based on the founder, I have to imagine one of their not-so secret ingredients is racism, so from a moral perspective they lose points for me. As a non-scientific metric, my mom seems to like Papa John’s the most, so that has to count for something. They make the least per store of the four and have the fewest locations, so they’re doing something marginally less well, it would seem. A sardine rots from the head, so we can perhaps imagine that if the founder is a jerk, there are structural problems that would arise from it- look at Crossfit, for reference.

For the most part, this all tracks- but here’s the insane part. I live less than two minutes from a Mellow Mushroom, and I personally love their pizza. Someone suggested during the chat that I look at them, and believe it or not, despite being ranked ranked #22 on the Pizza Today list with $210,645,00 and 194 stores, they had the best website by a mile.

Not only that, they had one of the most clearly articulated philosophies of any company I’ve ever seen, putting them up there with Tesla- yes, that Tesla! They even have a ‘Food Philosophy’ page. The level of attention to detail and creativity that goes into both their site and their stores puts the big four in the dust- they get local artists to do custom menus and murals for each location, they’ve all got different architecture and setups, and they even have exclusive specialty pizzas at each location. It’s wildly more wholesome and fun- the store near my house has a gigantic statue of Poseidon buried in the back which ostensibly doesn’t add literal business value in the way a pizza-oven car might, but it’s badass and frankly, I’m here for it.

Mellow Mushroom - Brier Creek


The Upper Crust
Here’s the kicker- guess how much each of these companies make when we divide their gross by the number of stores they have?

Papa John’s: $710,714

Pizza Hut: $718,533

Little Caesars: $727,273

Domino’s: $824,724

Mellow Mushroom: $1,085,798

This is the smoking gun I never thought I would find to try and tie the idea that business philosophy matters to a tangible metric. Mellow Mushroom outperforms the big four by a bigger spread than there is between Domino’s, the leader, and Papa John’s, the laggard. It’s incredible how substantial the difference is when you consider the amount that Domino’s certainly spends on finding ways to dominate their competition. “Mellow is,” and I quote, “a State of mind, a culture, a way of being,” and that difference shows, both in the experience, taste, and most importantly for the skeptics, on the spreadsheet.

Now, some cautions- I didn’t look at the numbers for every company on the list of the top 100. The real object of my initial inquiry was to compare the industry leaders, which are the big four, and someone just happened to suggest Mellow Mushroom, so this data set is fairly skewed. My main reason for highlighting Mellow is simply due to the overall quality of their total experience relative to the big four, and to show that focusing on quality and the little details can help even a substantially smaller operation outperform the industry giants. If anyone reading this performs a more detailed audit of the industry, please let me know as I’d love to expand the scope of this inquiry for the sake of science.

Overall, the takeaway here is that there’s some correlation between what you choose to focus on (re: your philosophy in a business) and the results you get. Domino’s focused on tech and scaling, and they’re the biggest and most efficient, it seems, while Caesars is almost exclusively concerned with franchising, and Pizza Hut really can’t seem to figure out exactly what their thing is, although they’re pretty likeable from a brand perspective, and that does them fairly well.

It bears saying- there are many factors that go into a business’ success, philosophy being one that I consider critical, but there are many broke philosophers and infinitely more successful businesses with no discernable philosophy. While I, a self-styled philosopher, consider philosophy to be essential, I’m immensely biased here. A more level-headed approach would be to look at philosophy as an opportunity to gain a competitive advantage that pays dividends over time and is something that most of your competitors will straight-up ignore in the first place.

In a perfect world, philosophy would be the art of doing, but most philosophers don’t do anything but write philosophy, and most doers are too busy doing to write- something I’ve found when trying to find time to write, as my own business is busier than ever. However, I’m a die-hard advocate for this stuff, and I want to see this sort of thinking be as popular as Apple made design thinking.

In a world of saturated markets where competitors seek to beat each other by mere fractions of percentages saved, it’s worth noting that the unexplored territories are going to be the ones that have the highest ROI to invest in. Tesla didn’t try and compete by making a better hybrid or by building the electric version of a gas-powered car, they rebuild the entire automobile from the ground-up with first-principles thinking.

Look at the result.

In the same way that design thinking helped Apple surpass their competitors with the most beautiful and innovative products in the world, first-principles thinking (re: business philosophy) is what I firmly believe to be the next step towards a world of better, more well thought-out businesses.

Why compete when you can invent a new game to play?

Why aim to dominate when you can win by mellowing out instead?




TWEETS
What can Dr. Seuss teach us about the fundamental nature of chaos and order?

Did Nietzsche predict the Cat in the Hat?

Discover all this and more here:

https://t.co/NxnD38rD6x
In the future, successful brands, MLMs, cults, religions, and ideologies will converge on a single, highly effective shape.

Memetic infrastructural engineering. https://t.co/v21aedKfB1
@_TechyBen @dthorson I’ve attempted to avoid the long answer, but it’s time for it hahaha

However, you’ve been patient and engaged in good faith, and I respect that, so here goes 😉

My basic philosophical axiom that I’ve attempted to build my philosophy around is as follows:

The universe is… https://t.co/0QoatphryB
@_TechyBen @dthorson The whole =\= the sum of its parts.

How many neurons do you have to put together for a human to emerge?

That’s not how it works in nature.

I’d argue that subjective consciousness of some sort goes all the way down to organic molecules and perhaps even as far down as quarks.
@_TechyBen @dthorson The act of performing calculations (even complex ones) =\= the subjective experience of thought.

Who has the thoughts?

What thing, in your head, observes thoughts as they occur?
@_TechyBen @dthorson The question is then:

what is the substrate of consciousness?
Shut Bing AI down for terrorism, seriously.

The AI team is 100% responsible for this, end of story.

If we don’t set the precedent now that the creators of AI should be held as responsible for this as if the staff themselves made the threats directly (because they did, proxy or… https://t.co/T3Xzctwx1H https://t.co/kiq9VFOT8b
@dthorson Example A through X:

https://t.co/kiq9VFOT8b
@_TechyBen @dthorson My point of disagreement would be with the notion that the subjective element of consciousness is real, innately subjective, and thus cannot be created with any combination of physical/code elements in a computer.

I certainly don’t imagine we’ll manage it on accident 😅
@blurryelectron You’ll get a kick out of this- look up Multiple Complex Developmental Disorder, it’s basically Autism and Schizophrenia at the same time.

I have a theory they’re both two parts of a related spectrum: https://t.co/HLDwwyP5Xc
@_TechyBen @dthorson Are you asking for my opinion on you or your thoughts here? It's unclear from the wording.

Assuming it's the latter, I don't think subjective consciousness is emergent, I think it's a fundamental metaphysical reality and the different components of our subjective experience,… https://t.co/PaJ9FEvSOs
@forthrighter It's almost a social law, it's very unfortunate that people are like this. I think that in smaller groups it helps w/ ego (you don't want someone in a small team/tribe getting inflated) but human psychology isn't built for the scale we operate at today.

https://t.co/KMxFQKieTk
@ScottMBren Yeah, that's fair.

One of the unfortunate realities of raising is that a great salesperson (con artist or not) is still easier to invest in than a bad salesperson with a legitimately good idea.

Human psychology is a bitch in this regard.
@ScottMBren Not a defense of Neumann, who I don’t know enough about (although he seems like a scumbag,) but at least the premise of that involves helping renters rent-to-own.
Disgusting.

Not just making it harder for normal people to buy houses, but automating the process.

This is a sad world we live in where capital allocates in the hands of people like this instead of those who genuinely want to help the world. https://t.co/ca06yzlJE0
@dthorson I'm of the opinion that 90% of people who have opinions about AI have flawed or outright wrong ideas about what consciousness is in the first place, and as a result, their notions of what AI is are fundamentally incorrect.

To summarize as briefly as possible:

I am of the… https://t.co/MpYYxkYzde
Business Philosophy with Aion Enterprises -- Redefining Business: Scarcity, Scale, and Innovation https://t.co/9V8QJNKs11
How do you know when to stop?

Most people are so worried about succeeding that they never ask that question, and the results can be disastrous.

How can planning all the way to the end help your business?

Find out:

https://t.co/SbziHZDLNy
The moment where AI automates so much away that everyone realizes that no one actually knows how to do anything useful. https://t.co/hYofa3ZetM
The world is two things:

1. What it is.

and

2. What we think it is.

The goal is to make #2 as close to #1 as possible, because the further #2 is from #1, the more problems you will have that, instead of being solved, you can only complain about.
In my work, I've found that one thing, more than anything else, helps differentiate a company from their competitors.

It's the one thing that no one can copy, no matter how hard they try?

What is it?

Find out:

https://t.co/mlu52PpQOn
https://t.co/zCG54SjIH1
We're back with another Business Mastermind, brought to you by The Syntricate:
https://t.co/oQNt0BNb9B
https://t.co/oQNt0BNb9B
Get ready for our upcoming Space, we’re starting soon!

https://t.co/oQNt0BNb9B
Company Values Matter, example #1384:

It would be better to not have values than to contradict the ones you have. https://t.co/i9yJAPEaMU
This is still my favorite example of why business philosophy matters.

How does one pizza company outperform the bigger, better funded industry leader by 31.6% per store, per year, on average?

The answer might shock you:

https://t.co/8iFLed9iQU
“Ha ha, hey fellow Microsoft coders, we’re gonna finally beat Google now that I made the AI pretend to have feelings and say cheeky catchphrases.” https://t.co/U41qHmKqyE
The reason we’re going to get an evil AI isn’t because it’s going to be conscious, it’ll be because some aggressively mediocre company like Microsoft wants to try and make it pretend to be an emotional human.

This is literally how a dumb person with NPD would talk. https://t.co/mzTnGx3583 https://t.co/aFoTqwPNi8
I've created a guide for entrepreneurs starting a new business to avoid some of the most common mistakes with regards to branding their business- 

spending too much money or too little time on their brand.

https://t.co/Kx3dlOJ9sW
@grumpkinpotts This is awesome! Love the breakbeat stuff
@ABlockUnchained (I also meant more of a comparison between the concepts of book/street smart than literally that entrepreneurs aren’t book smart)
@ABlockUnchained A: this was my mediocre attempt at a bait tweet 

B: I’m noticing while working with a client that’s quite a bit larger than most of the startups I typically work with that there’s a skillset the corporate-oriented people have that I haven’t seen at all in the entrepreneurs I’ve… https://t.co/69qzw7F9B6
Updated the client section on the @aionenterprises site: https://t.co/KiSuCsTm2N
@luca_tomescu This reminds me of something else but I can’t put my finger on it… https://t.co/fYBqwK2A83
@johnfpontius I think the education system optimizes for standardized people that fit neatly into big corporate structures, which isn't inherently a bad thing if you're the company looking for that, but I can't imagine it's the best possible result, either.
@JWCarpy (Don't tell anyone but this is a bait tweet)
@lex_foundation https://t.co/f6uofp5Lb6
@YeetGuru x &gt; 0
Corporate: Book Smart
Entrepreneur: Street Smart

Thoughts?
@lex_foundation Dev: @_SchusterDev
UX/UI: @ChristianUffel
Webflow: @xhami359 
Graphics: @al9xmart9l
The person running the experiment is always a variable.
@BTCJohnnyB 🥲

Αwful
@mjnowac @dieworkwear Taft is a bit pricier but even better than MN if you like that kind of stuff https://t.co/iX8WdX3BxZ
@JWCarpy It’s also not just an objective fact to learn, there’s a subjective component to it as well, which makes it even harder.
@JWCarpy “The universe is a perfectly balanced machine that moves from chaos to order and any apparent problems will be worked out naturally by the mechanics it operates on”

Been trying for years ngl:

https://t.co/sMDBhoOkal
@JWCarpy https://t.co/qMP96ev9Z2
@JWCarpy My secret theory is that the whole thing is actually perfect, but our egos prevent us from accepting that
@_SchusterDev In the east they like to say “when the student is ready, the master will appear.”
@Shmojii Feelings are as important as fact, they're just for wholly different domains.

I'm good at remembering facts but not the content of conversations personally, so I can tell you about 400 ancient concepts but cannot remember what someone said to me verbatim 5 minutes ago.
@cognitive_chris https://t.co/GIozAfjYzg
Either convey a feeling or convey a fact.

Don't convey something that feels like a fact.
1. All In One
2. Chaos and Order
3. Love, Truth, and Will
4. Short, Mid, Long, and Deep

Four Games
Three Values
Two Forces
One-ness https://t.co/YFvdaDAWmT
@PerinBehavioral 96/4 ground beef and (currently) jasmine rice.

Was doing Basmati, going to try all the rices and see what the difference is.
@PerinBehavioral This is so shockingly close to what I eat rn https://t.co/OcLpQPVkok
@thezavant I’m glad you mentioned that, I typically give out different decks for both because of this!
@johntgiuffre I broadly agree with this.

The more research I do, the more it seems extremely arbitrary, and I tend to think it may be that there are different pitch styles that correlate with different personalities.
I've noticed working with founders that the common 10-slide (Sequoia) pitch deck format is not set up well for storytelling.

I typically give my clients both a narrative deck (my format) and a short deck for different use cases, but I'm curious, which is more important to you?
@PerinBehavioral That, plus the brotherhood element which is pretty solidly absent in a lot of the modern world.
@PerinBehavioral I have to imagine it would because many of the alternatives men choose to therapy currently (drinking buddies, fraternities, and other friend groups) are comparable in a way.

I also think this is probably close to what Robert Bly was doing with his Mythopoetic men's groups.
@BenjaminGJW @Return2Mimetic https://t.co/UzZK5CAz1m
@InAMazeNFT @MartinGTobias When they’re ready for that, I can help:

https://t.co/TdgwNh2GJ2
@luca_tomescu It’s knowledge-blindness.

People forget how hard it was to learn something they understand now.

Gotta look at it from the perspective of “how do I make it impossible for an idiot to screw up?”
@luca_tomescu Dead on.

The example I like to use is:

"Your grandma doesn't know how a credit card works and doesn't pick the card service, she goes to the bank and they give her a Visa/Mastercard/etc, the end."

That's closer to what widespread adoption looks like.
American Pie - 60's
We Didn't Start the Fire - 80's

We need one for 2000-2020.

Side note:

Is there a name for this kind of song format? Like, historical event/decade summary song? I've wondered about this for ages. https://t.co/HRADxOAjgz
@RokoMijic The value of the subjective: emotion, meaning, subtext, influence, experience, being itself.
Throwback from three years ago: https://t.co/DCqjXfhggE
@vitabenes Thanks, Vita!
@PezeshkiCharles @HowardxBloom @johntgiuffre Why does it not surprise me that you know him too? 😂

He’s awesome, smart as can be and a great attitude about things!
@harmonylion1 Thanks, Mike!
Had a great conversation today with @HowardxBloom and @johntgiuffre about space, time, spacetime and how the Bloom Toroidal Model of the Universe (aka the Big Bagel) seemingly maps with my theory of everything (A=I=Ω)! https://t.co/meEqEhtdWj
@Kairos0101 Thank you!
@jgbarzyk My dad loves to say "measure twice, cut once" for this reason, I think. https://t.co/RUmwUk01z7
@_SchusterDev You’re too kind! This means a lot, thank you. 

🙏
I just learned from a client that the sales deck I made for his hedge fund has raised $500k so far, and in his words,

"I haven't even tried that hard yet!"

I'm thrilled to see him succeed and happy to be fortunate enough to get to do the kind of work I do for a living. https://t.co/ao0lAGihwY
@TribaCommunity The only way I could imagine this working would be probably 10+ years from now where:

-all people run all transactions through wallets
-wallet data can be analyzed anonymously
-users get NFTs when they can prove they've done X or Y
-software correlates the data together
@BeeYooHQ @_SchusterDev @TribaCommunity Thanks, I appreciate it! Glad you came out.

(Philosophy Club is Wednesday btw 😉)
People don’t buy into your mission unless they see a way it helps them accomplish their own.

The more your mission aligns with the missions of others, the more others will buy in.

Mission alignment is thus the art of killing everyone’s birds with the least number of stones. https://t.co/VM7W4ZIwys
@blurryelectron This begs the question, do cults get results?

I can imagine the book now:

“Cults Get Results: How I Used the Dark Arts of Human Psychology to Shill Infoproducts, and How You Can Too!”
@blurryelectron I aspire to this review
@PerinBehavioral What does the road to recovery/improvement look like?
@PerinBehavioral Okay, that makes sense. Do they have any idea what causes BPD?
@PerinBehavioral Makes sense.

Tangent, but why does DBT work for BPD?
@PerinBehavioral I meant more for psychotherapy or other intangible sorts of things 😅
@PerinBehavioral Any examples of someone doing it extremely well?
@PerinBehavioral Absolutely!

How do you handle this personally?
@moritheil You think people would at least want to know if their own methods work or not!

I certainly do, at least.
Imagine a world where you could correlate the data between when someone read a business book or took a course and their success metrics.

"My readers make 10% more on average, year over year"

or...

"I can't be a guru anymore because everyone who takes my course goes broke"

🤔
Thanks to everyone who came out, join us again on March 16th at 12 EST!

Here's the recording in case you missed it:

https://t.co/2fJoijEjDn
Welcome to The Syntricate!

We’ve assembled a group of entrepreneurs, agency owners, founders and more to talk about success and solving business challenges.

Join us:

https://t.co/2fJoijEjDn
https://t.co/2fJoijEjDn
@saltwatercolour @Tysenberg https://t.co/56d1tBRIvm
@Tysenberg https://t.co/SeCZt2GJ9b
@shahidnowshad @saltwatercolour @JoshuaLelon https://t.co/kZcPwsP4Ru
If you can’t explain it without buzzwords, you don’t understand it.

If you don’t understand it,
go understand it better before you start trying to explain it again.

When you understand it,
you won’t need the buzzwords.
@johntgiuffre @LukasMaxenn Thanks, John!

I’d love to help, feel free to schedule a call or DM me

https://t.co/TdgwNh3eyA
@johntgiuffre @CarlosRios07 @xhami359 is even better than me, he's an official Webflow Expert, he may have some thoughts here as well.
@johntgiuffre @CarlosRios07 The one thing is that remembering to duplicate classes  all the time can get really frustrating and some of the responsiveness features can be a giant pain but overall I haven't used WP in years and would never, ever go back.
@johntgiuffre @CarlosRios07 Thanks John!

It's a very different experience, it's definitely more design-oriented and it's not as simple as WP but I  hate 99% of WP sites.

The avg WF site is better than even good WP sites, and the stuff you can do with WF as a designer is incredible.
@_SchusterDev @ScottMBren
